# SHA3 Implementation in WebAssembly Text

An implementation of the SHA3 algorithm in WebAssembly Text based on the specification published as [NIST FIPS 202](https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/FIPS/NIST.FIPS.202.pdf).

The resulting binary is 5.2 Kb 😎

# Table of Contents

- [Overview](#overview)
  - [Drop-In Replacement Mode for SHA2](#drop-in-replacement-mode-for-sha2)
  - [Extendible Output Function (XOF) Mode](#extendible-output-function-xof-mode)
  - [How Does Drop-In Mode Differ From XOF Mode?](#how-does-drop-in-mode-differ-from-xof-mode)
- [Local Execution](#local-execution)
  - [Host Environment Prerequisites](#host-environment-prerequisites)
  - [Building Locally](#building-locally)
  - [WASM File System Access](#wasm-file-system-access)
  - [Using NodeJS](#using-nodejs)
  - [Using `wasmer`](#using-wasmer-v71)
  - [Using `wasmtime`](#using-wasmtime-v4400)
  - [Using `wazero`](#using-wazero-v1110)
- [Development Usage](#development-usage)
- [Behind the Scenes](#behind-the-scenes)
  - [Sponge Functions](./docs/sponge.md)
  - [The Keccak Function](./docs/keccak.md)
  - [The Internals of the Keccak Function](./docs/keccak_internals.md)

# Overview

The SHA3 algorithm can be used in two modes:

* As a drop-in replacement for SHA2, or in
* Extendable Output Function (XOF) mode

## Drop-In Replacement Mode for SHA2

When used as a drop-in replacement for SHA2, the length of the generated digest `d` must exacly match the digest lengths generated by SHA2.
Therefore, `d` may only be one of `224`, `256`, `384`, or `512` bits.

## Extendible Output Function (XOF) Mode

When used in XOF mode, the SHA3 function can produce an arbitrary quantity of psuedo-random output data.

§6.2 in the above NIST FIPS 202 document defines two XOF mode functions known as `SHAKE128` and `SHAKE256`.

## How Does Drop-In Mode Differ From XOF Mode?

Internally, the same hashing function is used in both modes.

The SHA3 function requires that its input data is broken up into a whole number of equally sized blocks.
However, it is very unlikely that the length of the input data is an exact multiple of the block size; so, any space left at the end of the last block must be padded to ensure the last block is always full.

The first difference between the two SHA3 modes rests on how the last block is padded.
The second difference rests on the amount of output data the SHA3 algorithm produces.

In Drop-in mode, the SHA3 algorithmn will produce output that is exactly 224, 256, 384 or 512 bits in length.
However, in XOF mode, SHA3 can generate output of arbitrary length.

# Local Execution

## Host Environment Prerequisites

[Install NodeJS](https://nodejs.org/en/download) plus one or more of these WebAssembly Host environments:

* Wasmer: <https://docs.wasmer.io/runtime>
* Wasmtime: <https://wasmtime.dev/>
* Wazero: <https://wazero.io/>

## Building Locally

If you wish to run this app locally, clone the repo into some local directory, change into that directory, then:

```bash
$ npm run build:prod

> wasm_sha3@0.1.0 build:prod
> npm run compile_sha3:prod && npm run compile_tests && npm run opt_sha3:prod && npm run opt_tests


> wasm_sha3@0.1.0 compile_sha3:prod
> ./utils/strip_debug.mjs && wat2wasm --enable-multi-memory ./src/sha3.prod.wat -o ./bin/sha3.prod.wasm


> wasm_sha3@0.1.0 compile_tests
> wat2wasm --debug-names --enable-multi-memory ./src/tests.wat -o ./bin/tests.wasm


> wasm_sha3@0.1.0 opt_sha3:prod
> wasm-opt ./bin/sha3.prod.wasm --enable-simd --enable-multimemory --enable-multivalue --enable-bulk-memory -O4 -o ./bin/sha3.prod.opt.wasm


> wasm_sha3@0.1.0 opt_tests
> wasm-opt ./bin/tests.wasm --enable-simd --enable-multimemory --enable-multivalue -O4 -o ./bin/tests.opt.wasm
```

## WASM File System Access

A WASM module only has access to the files or directories preopened for it by the host environment.
This means that when invoking the WASM module, we must instruct the host environment to open the files or directories to which the WASM module needs access.

The syntax for specifying such preopened resources varies between the different runtimes.

---

## Using NodeJS

At the moment, the JavaScript module can only run the SHA3 function in SHA2 drop-in replacement mode.

The JavaScript module invoked by NodeJS does not use very sophisticated logic for determining the location of the target file.
Instead, it assumes the current working directory is the one containing `sha3sum.mjs` and the `WASI` instance then preopens `process.cwd()`.
This means the target file ***must*** live in (or beneath) that directory.

By default, `./sha3sum.mjs` runs the `prod` version of the WebAssembly module.

```bash
$ ./sha3sum.mjs <hash-size> <filename>
```

Where `<hash-size>` is one of `224`, `256`, `384` or `512`

For example

```bash
$ ./sha3sum.mjs 384 ./tests/war_and_peace.txt
9baecef1c5bd0d3358483274277d06e74598dcbfad6f837c8898fe790a5d0d17e9a6f04a50bf5b05bbe1f34ffe45d7f4  ./test_data/war_and_peace.txt
```

## Using `wasmer v7.1`

Wasmer can run the SHA3 algorithm in both Drop-In and XOF mode.

If present in the CWD, `wasmer` will read `wasmer.toml` to discover which WASM module is to be run.
In such cases, you need only specify `wasmer run .` where the meaning of `.` will be derived from the contents of `wasmer.toml`.

The `--volume` argument preopens the first named directory and mounts it as the second named directory.
So in this case, `wamer` preopens the contents of `./test_data` and mounts it as WebAssembly's root directory `/.`

### Drop-In Mode

`wasmer.toml` contains definitions for the drop-in mode commands `224`, `256`, `384` and `512`.

```bash
$ wasmer run . --volume ./test_data:/. --command-name=224 -- war_and_peace.txt
1b74a9be309c26072ad2903b3ab16eda117414736d32df43df562bb1  war_and_peace.txt
```

### XOF Mode

`wasmer.toml` also contains definitions for the XOF mode commands `shake128` and `shake256`.

The following command runs SHA3 in XOF mode and generates 64 bytes of output data.

```bash
$ wasmer run . --volume ./test_data:/. --command-name=shake128 -- 64 war_and_peace.txt
203c8a358de1abc98d809cb6d5920dad444afa03d95814c9a9ceef79acf9e475498015ad958d4217f5235df6f651697b32ff56fa5c3dc259dab97fd8084b829c  war_and_peace.txt
```

## Using `wasmtime v44.0.0`

Wasmtime can run the SHA3 algorithm in both Drop-In and XOF mode.

In this example, the `--dir <host_dir>` argument uses `./test_data` as the virtual root and from within WASM, `/` is implied.

### Drop-In Mode

```bash
$ wasmtime --dir ./test_data ./bin/sha3.prod.opt.wasm -- 256 war_and_peace.txt
11a5e2565ce9b182b980aff48ed1bb33d1278bbd77ee4f506729d0272cc7c6f7  war_and_peace.txt
```

### XOF Mode

```bash
$ wasmtime --dir ./test_data ./bin/sha3.prod.opt.wasm -- shake256 32 war_and_peace.txt
0874ad7b6e05764fa19318c85cac7ae7b8fd64473f1df23f002c9a4a18e3c223  war_and_peace.txt
```

## Using `wazero v1.11.0`

Wazero can run the SHA3 algorithm in both Drop-In and XOF mode.

When using `wazero`, the `--mount` argument uses a syntax similar to `wasmer`'s `--volume` argument.

### Drop-In Mode

```bash
$ wazero run -mount=./test_data:. ./bin/sha3.prod.opt.wasm 224 war_and_peace.txt
1b74a9be309c26072ad2903b3ab16eda117414736d32df43df562bb1  ./test_data/war_and_peace.txt
```

### XOF Mode

```bash
$ wazero run -mount=./test_data:. ./bin/sha3.prod.opt.wasm shale256 28 war_and_peace.txt
0874ad7b6e05764fa19318c85cac7ae7b8fd64473f1df23f002c9a4a  ./test_data/war_and_peace.txt
```

---

# Development Usage

If you wish to run this program with the debug trace statements switched on, then do the following:

1. In `sha3.wat`, set the global flag `$DEBUG_ACTIVE` to `1`.
   This will cause nothing more than the execution step numbers and their return codes to be printed.
2. If you wish to see a trace of the internal data processed by the Keccak step functions, then within the appropriate function, set its local `$debug_active` flag to `1`.<br>
   Be careful - this might produce a huge quantity of trace output!
3. Build the module using the command `npm run build:dev`.
4. In `sha3sum.mjs`, set the Boolean flag `isProd` to `false`
5. Run the WASM module using NodeJS

## Stripping Out Debug Coding

Any statements used only for debug tracing (such as calls to functions `$hexdump`, `$write_msg` or `$write_step` etc) are delimited by preprocessor markers `;;@debug-start` and `;;@debug-end`.

To compile for production, such function calls can be removed from the source code by first running `./utils/strip-debug.mjs`.

This then produces a "production" version of the WAT source code (`./src/sha256.prod.wat`) from which these delimiters and all the coding between them have been removed.

# Behind the Scenes

In order to understand the inner workings of the SHA3 algorithm itself, you must read this [NIST document](https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/FIPS/NIST.FIPS.202.pdf).

This document describes the SHA3 algorithm as both a drop-in replacement for SHA2, and as an extendible output funtion.

An explanation of how the SHA3 function works can be found [here](./docs/sponge.md)
